1. Explain the difference between structured and unstructured data, and give 1 example of each in the context of a business database.

Structured Data have fix structure format. For ex, a SQL db ingesting a csv file containing emp info (emp_id, emp_name, emp_salary)
Unstructured Data have NO fix structure format. For ex, AWS S3 bucket storing audio file, video file, and image in same folder

2. Compare relational and non-relational (NoSQL) databases in terms of schema flexibility, scalability, and typical use cases.

a relational db has fixed schema and stores data in structured tables with columns and rows.
They are suitable for apps that require consistent, predictable and reliable transc and r/s between data.
For ex. banking system storing bank acc and transc data for auditing, logging purposes

no SQL db has high flexibility that can store data in diff format (document, key-value, graph structures)
it is designed for high flexibility (can alter data type easily) and high scalability (horizontal scaling across multiple servers)
For ex. a ecomm app storing product info in document db where diff products have diffrent types of attributes

3. Describe the structure of a hierarchical database model. State 1 advantage and 1 disadvantage.

A hierarchical databse stores data in a tree-like structure. each node will have 1 parent only. 
For ex, a file system
Pros: easy to navigate data as data traverse in a single direction 
Cons: difficult to represent data with many to many relationships and restructuring hierachies is costly and inflexible 


4. Explain how a network database model differs from a hierarchical database model in representing relationships between records.

Network db allows data to represnet many to many r/s. unlike hierarchical model. 
For ex. 
   Student
   /    \
Course1 Course2

a student can take many course. a course can have many students. 
For ex, universities and airline booking system
it makes it flexible to represent complex data relationships 
However, it can be complex to design and query thaan  hierarchical database model


5. What is a graph database, and why is it particularly well-suited to applications like fraud detection or social network analysis?

A graph db stores data in nodes (objects) and edges (relationships).
it is used to store and analyse relationships between nodes.
well suited for apps like fraud and social network as it can identify complex connections between each nodes  

6. Describe the key characteristics of a document database (e.g., MongoDB-style) and give one example application.

document db stores data in semi-structured data usually in (json/bson) format. 
ex, content management system where product info with image is stored and regularly 
updated with varying attributes without a fixed schema  


7. What are streaming processing systems, and how do they differ from traditional batch data processing?

stream processing system ingest and process data in near real time rather than traditional batch data processing where
data are collected in scheduled batches. Stream processing are used when apps need real time analysis.
For ex, banking system stream process transcational data and data is analyse for fraud detection.


8. Explain 2 key challenges of cloud-based database systems (e.g., internet speed dependency, security).

internet connection is required for cloud based db systems since it is connected to remote servers,
a low internet speed will affect the performance and user experience.

since sensitive data is stored and transimitedd outside or organisations's direct control, it raises risk of unathorusized access 

9. Distinguish between "big data" and "high-quality vs. low-quality data" as discussed in the database overview 
— why does an organisation need to consider both dimensions?

Big data are datasets that are very large, complex and generated at high speeds. 
High quality data are data that are accurate, consistent, up to date
Poor quality data are data that have duplicates, inconsistants, inaccurate, outdated 
An org need to consider both dimension as they need to analyse the data to make decision making and poor quality data is not useful.
to convert poor quality data to high quality, org can consider building an elt pipeline to cleanse and transform data before analysing