Case Study B Answer

Observation for chart 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5

key evidence of a country moving to industrialisation

Chart 1 (Sectoral share of GDP)

- Manufacturing shows a rising trendline (0.3788x) suggesting increased its contribution to GDP over the years
  while Agriculture shows a slightly rising/flat trendline (0.0009x) suggesting it has 
  maintained a relatively stable contribution to GDP.

- Trendline for Manufacturing is reliable as R² >= 0.5 (0.709) 
  while trendline for Agriculture is not reliable as R² < 0.5 (0.0234) = not a strong evidence 
   
- % Share of GDP for Manufacturing is much larger compared to Agriculture (13.312% > 0.2906%)
  
- Overall, the rising contribution of Manufacturing, alongside the relatively stable contribution 
  of Agriculture, may suggest a shift towards greater industrialisation in the economy


Chart 2 (Sectoral growth of GDP)

- Growth rate for Manufacturing above 0% (5.9758%) but showing a falling trend (-0.2992x). However, 
  the trendline is unreliable as R² < 0.5 (0.463) = not a strong evidence 

- Growth rate for Agriculture above 0% (0.3752%) and showing a rising trend (0.2557x). However, 
  the trendline is unreliable as R² < 0.5 (0.0283). Also, there are occurences of below 0% 
  growth rate. 


Chart 3 (Relationship of Manufacturing output vs GDP) - Scatterplot graph

- Scatterplot shows a positive relationship between manufacturing output and GDP.
  
- The relationship is very reliable as the R² > 0.5 (0.9625) (strong manufacturing growth = strong GDP)
  
- This suggests manufacturing is very beneficial for the economy 


Chart 4 (fixed capital formation - K)

- Fixed capital formation (k) shows a rising trendline (2E+08x), this is expected as firms acquire
  more equipment and machines for industrial production. 

- However the R² is < 0.5 (0.2508) suggesting this trendline is not reliable = not a strong evidence 


Chart 5 (The labour market) 

- Labour productivity shows a falling trendline (-338.16x). 
  But the R² is < 0.5 (0.3479) = not a strong evidence.
  Suggests labour productivity is not falling most of the time. 

- GDP per capita shows a rising trendline (125.05x).
  But the R² is < 0.5 (0.4315) = not a strong evidence. 
  
- Unemployment rate shows a slight rising trendline (0.015x). 
  The R² is > 0.5 (0.5725) thus the trendline is reliable.
  Suggest that economy is experiencing rising unemployment which is not beneficial for economy 
  Rising unemployment can lead to deflation and in severe case lead to depression 
  Possible causes of rising unemployment due to tighter labour market
  - low FDI 
  - interest rate hikes
  - hiring freeze 
  - poor GDP growth 
   

Chart 6 (FDI)

- Trade openness above 50% (orange line) suggests very trade dependent country - 
  High imports and exports flowing into the economy. 

- The trendline is falling (-0.914x) but the R² is < 0.5 (0.1128) suggest it is not reliable

- R² for FDI Inflow is essentially 0 suggesting no meaningful trend reflecting inconsistent investor flow


Regression (FDI)

- Positive factors
  - Gross fixed capital formation increasing will increase FDI inflows but P > 0.05 (r/s is not statistically significant)
  - Trade openness increasing will increase FDI inflows with P < 0.05 (thus a strong driver of FDI) 

- Negative factors
  - Increase in GDP per capita and unemployment rate with will REDUCE FDI inflow but P > 0.05 (r/s is not statistically significant)




1. What are the key evidence we can gather that there is signs of industrialisation in Bahrain [4 marks]


Data in chart 1 shows manufacturing sector contribute more to Bahrain's GDP and the 
sector’s share of GDP is also rising with a reliable trendline.

Data in chart 2 shows the output growth of manufacturing is rising throughout the
period given the growth rates are all >0. Albeit a falling trendline but it is
unreliable and also suggest output by this sector is still growing.

Data in chart 1 and 2 of agriculture shows its more volatile (as seen in chart
2) and a smaller contribution to the GDP but this indicator is not
falling as given in the traditional way. 

Thus it is conclusive that Bahrain is experiencing industrialisation in the
studied period based on the manufacturing data



2. What are the key evidence we can gather that on the key benefits of industrialisation in
Bahrain [5 marks]

Benefits of industrialisation are in terms of
1. Rising GDP as given in chart 3. Strong evidence of rising GDP due to rising manufacturing Growth (very high R²)

2. Other benefits: 
- Increased in Fixed Capital Formation (K) (chart 4)
- GDP per Capita (chart 5)
- Labour Productivity (chart 5)

But all these have weak evidence as their R² are low 

This suggests the benefits of industrialisation are not passed on to the labour market in Bahrain


3. Explain using the data in the following chart why Bahrain is considered an open economy (i.e. adopting
outward oriented growth path)

State 2 other indicators that we will need to further justify the country is an open economy [6 marks]

Data in chart 6 shows Bahrain is open to trade and thus an open economy . Despite a weak
evidence of a falling trend, the very high trade openness of > 50% shows the large volume
of exports and import flowing

The evidence of FDI inflow serves as a weaker evidence moderate level in most periods.
Thus funds are still flowing into the economy suggest, a fairly open economy

1. Falling tariff rate suggest imports are taxed lesser and thus can flow more easily into the economy
2. GVC rate esp. backward participation to show Bahrain is a participant in the global value chain where 
   she process the semi finished goods for intermediate parts from the other countries



a. Explain the role of rising unemployment (as seen in chart 5), in affecting the level of FDI inflow in Bahrain 
and explain if the government should be worried about this development. [4marks]

Chart 5 shows rising unemployment in Bahrain, and this may occur as the economy moves rapidly to the manufacturing sector
This suggest workers are not equipped or skilled to find jobs in the new sector.
This suggest government should be worried about this development.

However, the evidence of it reducing FDI is weak as this variable’s p value (unemployment rate) > 0.05, so we cannot
fully deduce this rising unemployment will have a strong impact in Bahrain's FDI inflow. Perhaps a much
longer duration of studies, a more detailed variable [e.g. unemployment in the manufacturing
sector] will provide a more robust study.


b. With reference to Chart 6 and the regression results, Bahrain's FDI inflows are highly volatile.
Identify the most important positive x variable driving this relationship, and explain 1
economic reason for its impact. [7 marks] 

The most important positive x variable that will drive FDI inflow into Bahrain is trade openness.
The regression results suggest a rise in trade openness by 1% will bring in about $54m of FDI
into the economy.

The economy with trade openness of > 50 % ( as seen in chart 6) suggest an ease of flow of
imports and exports. This suggest the foreign companies face lesser difficulties if bringing in
foreign parts and inputs for the production. At the same time, export volume may be high
suggesting Bahrain a reputable and reliable export partner. This will thus lure foreign firms to
set up operation in Bahrain.

But a high trade openness may also suggest she is more prone to global crisis , affecting
supply chain, and/or global demand, thus making its FDI flow volatile as given in chart 6.


c. Explain one policy tool the government can use to further increase the 𝑥 variable
identified in part (b) (trade openess) to boost long-term FDI.

1 policy tool the Bahrain government can use is to reduce import tariffs and other trade barriers. 

This would further increase trade openness by making it easier and cheaper for firms to import raw materials, 
machinery and other production inputs. Lower trade costs would make Bahrain more attractive to foreign firms 
seeking to establish long-term operations, as they can access imported inputs more efficiently and export their products more easily. 
This could therefore encourage greater long-term FDI inflows into Bahrain.